Superconductivity is a phenomenon first discovered in 1911, and has a range of applications, being used in maglev trains, magnetic resonance imaging, NMR machines and more. Despite this, there is currently no unified theory which comprehensively describes superconductivity, but one which covers a large area is BCS theory, which defines conventional superconductors. However, it does have its shortcomings, which are becoming more apparent as more so-called unconventional superconductors (those which do not fit the theory) are being discovered.

Superconductivity was initially discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes on the 8th of April 1911. He was conducting experiments on the resistances of metals at extremely low temperatures when he noticed that the resistance of mercury abruptly disappeared when cooling it with liquid helium, noting that it was “almost zero.” The next major development on superconductivity occurred in 1933 when Meissner and Ochsenfeld measured the distribution of the magnetic field outside samples of superconducting tin and lead as they were cooled to their critical temperatures while in the presence of a weak external field. This showed that superconductors were not simply perfect conductors as those would not exhibit the same behaviour – when a magnet is at rest above a superconductor as it is brought to its critical temperature, the magnet will begin levitating, whereas a magnet above a perfect conductor will not. This is because the external field will simply cause the perfect conductor to resist the change in magnetic flux due to electromagnetic induction, while the superconductor will expel the field thus pushing the magnet away. This new discovery then led to the proposition of some theory, one of which being the Bardeen– Cooper–Schrieffer (BCS) theory, which was the first theory of superconductivity to explain the phenomenon from quantum mechanics.

BCS theory, proposed in 1957, was able to predict many of the observed phenomena, such as the Meissner effect, and was able to explain superconductivity through Cooper pairs, which are electrons paired together due to attraction between them and the crystal lattice of the superconductor. This pairing gives them a spin of either 0 or 1 (since electrons have a spin of +½ or –½) creating a composite boson and making them be able to flow through the material with zero resistance, since the pairing allows them to condense into the same quantum state, creating a gap of around 0.001eV (this gap is most easily seen by looking at tunneling) in the allowed energy levels of electrons and thus inhibits the collisions which would normally cause resistance when a current is flowing through the wire. When the thermal energy of the material exceeds this amount, the pairing is broken and thus the material stops being a superconductor. Many of these phenomena are independent of BCS theory, and this is becoming more relevant since there are more and more superconductors which are not describable by BCS theory, yet some qualitative predictions will remain relevant for any case where there is a weak force of attraction between electron pairs, which is present in many low-temperature superconductors (the weak-coupling case). BCS theory also gives an expression for the energy gap at a given temperature in terms of the critical temperature: the ratio between the energy gap at zero temperature and the superconducting transition temperature is Δ(T=0) = 1.736kBTc, irrespective of material.

However, as new high-temperature superconductors are discovered, which cannot be described by BCS theory, its validity is brought more into question; it fails to explain their existence as BCS theory predicts much lower superconducting transition temperatures due to the weak coupling between the electrons and the crystal lattice, which is what leads to the Cooper pairs which allow for superconductivity. Cuprates and iron-based superconductors have far higher superconducting transition temperatures than what BCS theory predicts. Additionally, the interactions between the electrons in these high- temperature superconductors are not the same weak electron-electron interactions as assumed by BCS theory; there is intermediate or strong coupling in many superconductors such as Pb or Hg, which changes the previously mentioned ratio between the energy gap and the superconducting transition temperature. Initially these new, high-temperature superconductors were classified as “unconventional superconductors”, but now as there are increasingly many of these unconventional superconductors are discovered and put into use due to only requiring liquid nitrogen as opposed to the more costly liquid helium, the theory itself is being put under question as to whether it actually explains the phenomenon of superconductivity. For example, a paper from J E Hirsche even argues that BCS theory fails to explain the Meissner effect, which is one of the most important phenomena for superconductivity. Although the Eliashberg theory extends BCS theory, it still fails to be a universal microscopic theory of superconductivity.

Although BCS theory has its limitations, it was still the first theory to describe superconductivity microscopically and was able to explain the zero resistance through the pairing of electrons. It was also able to predict an energy gap in the excitation spectrum of electrons which was later observed by tunnelling experiments and explained the Meissner effect through the coherent quantum state of Cooper pairs.